.\" shorthand for double quote that works everywhere.
.ds q \N'34'
.TH LIBINPUT __drivermansuffix__ __vendorversion__
.SH NAME
libinput \- libinput-based X.Org input driver
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B "Section \*qInputDevice\*q"
.BI "  Identifier \*q" devname \*q
.B  "  Driver \*qlibinput\*q"
.BI "  Option \*qDevice\*q   \*q" devpath \*q
\ \ ...
.B EndSection
.fi

.SH NOTE
This is the man page for the X input driver. If you are looking for the
library documentation, go to 
.BI http://wayland.freedesktop.org/libinput/doc/

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B libinput 
is an __xservername__ input driver based on libinput.  It
therefore supports all input devices that libinput can handle, including
most mice, keyboards, tablets and touchscreens.
.PP
It is recommended that
.B libinput
devices are configured through the
.B InputClass
directive (refer to __xconfigfile__(__filemansuffix__)) instead of manual
per-device configuration. Devices configured in the
__xconfigfile__(__filemansuffix__) are not hot-plug capable.

.SH CONFIGURATION DETAILS
Please refer to __xconfigfile__(__filemansuffix__) for general configuration
details and for options that can be used with all input drivers.  This
section only covers configuration details specific to this driver.
.PP
The following driver 
.B Options
are supported:
.TP 7
.BI "Option \*qAccelProfile\*q \*q" string \*q
Sets the pointer acceleration profile to the given profile. Permitted values
are
.BI adaptive,
.BI flat.
Not all devices support this option or all profiles. If a profile is
unsupported, the default profile for this device is used. For a description
on the profiles and their behavior, see the libinput documentation.
.TP 7
.BI "Option \*qAccelSpeed\*q \*q" float \*q
Sets the pointer acceleration speed within the range [-1, 1]
.TP 7
.BI "Option \*qButtonMapping\*q \*q" string \*q
Sets the logical button mapping for this device, see
XSetPointerMapping(__libmansuffix__). The string must be a
space-separated list of button mappings in the order of the
logical buttons on the device, starting with button 1.
The default mapping is "1 2 3 ... 32". A mapping of 0
deactivates the button. Multiple buttons can have the same mapping.
Invalid mapping strings are discarded and the default mapping
is used for all buttons. Buttons not specified in the user's mapping use the
default mapping. See section
.B BUTTON MAPPING
for more details.
.TP 7
.BI "Option \*qCalibrationMatrix\*q \*q" string \*q
A string of 9 space-separated floating point numbers, in the order
\*qa b c d e f g h i\*q.
Sets the calibration matrix to the 3x3 matrix where the first row is (abc),
the second row is (def) and the third row is (ghi).
.TP 7
.BI "Option \*qClickMethod\*q \*q" string \*q
Enables a click method. Permitted values are
.BI none,
.BI buttonareas,
.BI clickfinger.
Not all devices support all methods, if an option is unsupported, the
default click method for this device is used.
.TP 7
.BI "Option \*qDisableWhileTyping\*q \*q" bool \*q
Indicates if the touchpad should be disabled while typing on the keyboard
(this does not apply to modifier keys such as Ctrl or Alt).
.TP 7
.BI "Option \*qDevice\*q \*q" string \*q
Specifies the device through which the device can be accessed.  This will
generally be of the form \*q/dev/input/eventX\*q, where X is some integer.
When using
.B InputClass
directives, this option is set by the server.
The mapping from device node to hardware is system-dependent. Property:
"Device Node" (read-only).
.TP 7
.BI "Option \*qDragLockButtons\*q \*q" "L1 B1 L2 B2 ..." \*q
Sets "drag lock buttons" that simulate a button logically down even when it has
been physically released. To logically release a locked button, a second click
of the same button is required.
.IP
If the option is a single button number, that button acts as the
"meta" locking button for the next button number. See section
.B BUTTON DRAG LOCK
for details.
.IP
If the option is a list of button number pairs, the first number of each
number pair is the lock button, the second number the logical button number
to be locked. See section
.B BUTTON DRAG LOCK
for details.
.IP
For both meta and button pair configuration, the button numbers are
device button numbers, i.e. the
.B ButtonMapping
applies after drag lock.
.TP 7
.BI "Option \*qHorizontalScrolling\*q \*q" bool \*q
Disables horizontal scrolling. When disabled, this driver will discard any
horizontal scroll events from libinput. Note that this does not disable
horizontal scrolling, it merely discards the horizontal axis from any scroll
events.
.TP 7
.BI "Option \*qLeftHanded\*q \*q" bool \*q
Enables left-handed button orientation, i.e. swapping left and right buttons.
.TP 7
.BI "Option \*qMiddleEmulation\*q \*q" bool \*q
Enables middle button emulation. When enabled, pressing the left and right
buttons simultaneously produces a middle mouse button click.
.TP 7
.BI "Option \*qNaturalScrolling\*q \*q" bool \*q
Enables or disables natural scrolling behavior.
.TP 7
.BI "Option \*qRotationAngle\*q \*q" float \*q
Sets the rotation angle of the device to the given angle, in degrees
clockwise. The angle must be between 0.0 (inclusive) and 360.0 (exclusive).
.TP 7
.BI "Option \*qScrollButton\*q \*q" int \*q
Designates a button as scroll button. If the
.BI ScrollMethod
is
.BI button
and the button is logically held down, x/y axis movement is converted into
scroll events.
.TP 7
.BI "Option \*qScrollMethod\*q \*q" string \*q
Enables a scroll method. Permitted values are
.BI none,
.BI twofinger,
.BI edge,
.BI button.
Not all devices support all options, if an option is unsupported, the
default scroll option for this device is used.
.TP 7
.BI "Option \*qSendEventsMode\*q \*q" (disabled|enabled|disabled-on-external-mouse) \*q
Sets the send events mode to disabled, enabled, or "disable when an external
mouse is connected".
.TP 7
.BI "Option \*qTabletToolPressureCurve\*q \*q" "x0/y0 x1/y1 x2/y2 x3/y3" \*q
Set the pressure curve for a tablet stylus to the bezier formed by the four
points. The respective x/y coordinate must be in the [0.0, 1.0] range. For
more information see section
.B TABLET STYLUS PRESSURE CURVE.
.TP 7
.BI "Option \*qTabletToolAreaRatio\*q \*q" "w:h" \*q
Sets the area ratio for a tablet tool. The area always starts at the
origin (0/0) and expands to the largest available area with the specified
aspect ratio. Events outside this area are cropped to the area. The special
value "default" is used for the default mapping (i.e. the device-native
mapping). For more information see section
.B TABLET TOOL AREA RATIO.
.TP 7
.BI "Option \*qTapping\*q \*q" bool \*q
Enables or disables tap-to-click behavior.
.TP 7
.BI "Option \*qTappingButtonMap\*q \*q" (lrm|lmr) \*q
Set the button mapping for 1/2/3-finger taps to left/right/middle or
left/middle/right, respectively.
.TP 7
.BI "Option \*qTappingDrag\*q \*q" bool \*q
Enables or disables drag during tapping behavior ("tap-and-drag"). When
enabled, a tap followed by a finger held down causes a single button down
only, all motions of that finger thus translate into dragging motion.
Tap-and-drag requires option
.B Tapping
to be enabled.
.TP 7
.BI "Option \*qTappingDragLock\*q \*q" bool \*q
Enables or disables drag lock during tapping behavior. When enabled, a
finger up during tap-and-drag will not immediately release the button. If
the finger is set down again within the timeout, the dragging process
continues.
.PP
For all options, the options are only parsed if the device supports that
configuration option. For all options, the default value is the one used by
libinput. On configuration failure, the default value is applied.

.SH SUPPORTED PROPERTIES
.B libinput
exports runtime-configurable options as properties. If a property listed
below is not available, the matching configuration option is not available
on the device. This however does not imply that the feature is not available
on the device. The following properties are provided by the
.B libinput
driver.
.TP 7
.BI "libinput Accel Profiles Available"
2 boolean values (8 bit, 0 or 1), in order "adaptive", "flat".
Indicates which acceleration profiles are available on this device.
.TP 7
.BI "libinput Accel Profile Enabled"
2 boolean values (8 bit, 0 or 1), in order "adaptive", "flat".
Indicates which acceleration profile is currently enabled on this device.
.TP 7
.BI "libinput Accel Speed"
1 32-bit float value, defines the pointer speed. Value range -1, 1
.TP 7
.BI "libinput Button Scrolling Button"
1 32-bit value. Sets the button number to use for button scrolling. This
setting is independent of the scroll method, to enable button scrolling the
method must be set to button-scrolling and a valid button must be set.
.TP 7
.BI "libinput Calibration Matrix"
9 32-bit float values, representing a 3x3 calibration matrix, order is row
1, row 2, row 3
.TP 7
.BI "libinput Click Methods Available"
2 boolean values (8 bit, 0 or 1), in order "buttonareas", "clickfinger".
Indicates which click methods are available on this device.
.TP 7
.BI "libinput Click Methods Enabled"
2 boolean values (8 bit, 0 or 1), in order "buttonareas", "clickfinger".
Indicates which click methods are enabled on this device.
.TP 7
.BI "libinput Drag Lock Buttons"
Either one 8-bit value specifying the meta drag lock button, or a list of
button pairs. See section
.B BUTTON DRAG LOCK
for details.
.TP 7
.BI "libinput Horizontal Scrolling Enabled"
1 boolean value (8 bit, 0 or 1). Indicates whether horizontal scrolling
events are enabled or not.
.TP 7
.BI "libinput Left Handed Enabled"
1 boolean value (8 bit, 0 or 1). Indicates if left-handed mode is enabled or
disabled.
.TP 7
.BI "libinput Middle Emulation Enabled"
1 boolean value (8 bit, 0 or 1). Indicates if middle emulation is enabled or
disabled.
.TP 7
.BI "libinput Natural Scrolling Enabled"
1 boolean value (8 bit, 0 or 1). 1 enables natural scrolling
.TP 7
.BI "libinput Rotation Angle"
1 32-bit float value [0.0 to 360.0). Sets the rotation angle of the device,
clockwise of its natural neutral position.
.TP 7
.BI "libinput Scroll Methods Available"
3 boolean values (8 bit, 0 or 1), in order "two-finger", "edge", "button".
Indicates which scroll methods are available on this device.
.TP 7
.BI "libinput Scroll Method Enabled"
3 boolean values (8 bit, 0 or 1), in order "two-finger", "edge", "button".
Indicates which scroll method is currently enabled on this device.
.TP 7
.BI "libinput Send Events Modes Available"
2 boolean values (8 bit, 0 or 1), in order "disabled" and
"disabled-on-external-mouse". Indicates which send-event modes are available
on this device.
.TP 7
.BI "libinput Send Events Mode Enabled"
2 boolean values (8 bit, 0 or 1), in order "disabled" and
"disabled-on-external-mouse". Indicates which send-event modes is currently
enabled on this device.
.TP 7
.BI "libinput Tablet Tool Pressurecurve"
4 32-bit float values [0.0 to 1.0]. See section
.B TABLET TOOL PRESSURE CURVE
.TP7
.BI "libinput Tablet Tool Area Ratio"
2 32-bit values, corresponding to width and height. Special value 0, 0
resets to the default ratio. See section
.B TABLET TOOL AREA RATIO
for more information.
.TP 7
.BI "libinput Tapping Enabled"
1 boolean value (8 bit, 0 or 1). 1 enables tapping
.TP 7
.BI "libinput Tapping Button Mapping Enabled"
2 boolean value (8 bit, 0 or 1), in order "lrm" and "lmr". Indicates which
button mapping is currently enabled on this device.
.TP 7
.BI "libinput Tapping Drag Lock Enabled"
1 boolean value (8 bit, 0 or 1). 1 enables drag lock during tapping
.TP 7
.BI "libinput Disable While Typing Enabled"
1 boolean value (8 bit, 0 or 1). Indicates if disable while typing is
enabled or disabled.
.PP
Most properties have a
.BI "libinput <property name> Default"
equivalent that indicates the default value for this setting on this device.

.SH BUTTON MAPPING
X clients receive events with logical button numbers, where 1, 2, 3
are usually interpreted as left, middle, right and logical buttons 4, 5, 6,
7 are usually interpreted as scroll up, down, left, right. The fourth and
fifth physical buttons on a device will thus send logical buttons 8 and 9.
The
.B ButtonMapping
option adjusts the logical button mapping, it does not affect how a physical
button is mapped to a logical button.
.PP
Traditionally, a device was set to left-handed button mode by applying a
button mapping of
.B "\*q3 2 1 ...\*q"
On systems using the
.B libinput
__xservername__ input driver it is recommended to use the
.B LeftHanded
option instead.
.PP
The
.B libinput
__xservername__ input driver does not use the button mapping after setup.
Use XSetPointerMapping(__libmansuffix__) to modify the button mapping at
runtime.

.SH BUTTON DRAG LOCK
Button drag lock holds a button logically down even when the button itself
has been physically released since. Button drag lock comes in two modes.
.PP
If in "meta" mode, a meta button click activates drag lock for the next
button press of any other button. A button click in the future will keep
that button held logically down until a subsequent click of that same
button. The meta button events themselves are discarded. A separate meta
button click is required each time a drag lock should be activated for a
button in the future.
.PP
If in "pairs" mode, each button can be assigned a target locking button.
On button click, the target lock button is held logically down until the
next click of the same button. The button events themselves are discarded
and only the target button events are sent.
.TP
This feature is provided by this driver, not by libinput.

.SH TABLET TOOL PRESSURECURVE
The pressure curve affects how stylus pressure is reported. By default, the
hardware pressure is reported as-is. By setting a pressure curve, the feel
of the stylus can be adjusted to be more like e.g. a pencil or a brush.
.PP
The pressure curve is a cubic Bezier curve, drawn within a normalized range
of 0.0 to 1.0 between the four points provided. This normalized range is
applied to the tablet's pressure input so that the highest pressure maps to
1.0. The points must have increasing x coordinates, if x0 is larger than 0.0
all pressure values lower than x0 are equivalent to y0. If x3 is less than
1.0, all pressure values higher than x3  are equivalent to y3.

The input for a linear  curve  (default) is  "0.0/0.0 0.0/0.0 1.0/1.0 1.0/1.0";
a slightly
depressed curve (firmer) might be "0.0/0.0 0.05/0.0 1.0/0.95 1.0/1.0"; a slightly raised
curve (softer) might  be "0.0/0.0 0.0/0.05 0.95/1.0 1.0/1.0".
.TP
This feature is provided by this driver, not by libinput.

.SH TABLET TOOL AREA RATIO
By default, a tablet tool can access the whole sensor area and the tablet
area is mapped to the available screen area. For external tablets like
the Wacom Intuos series, the height:width ratio of the tablet may be
different to that of the monitor, causing the skew of input data.
.PP
To avoid this skew of input data, an area ratio may be set to match the
ratio of the screen device. For example, a ratio of 4:3 will reduce the
available area of the tablet to the largest available area with a ratio of
4:3. Events within this area will scale to the tablet's announced axis
range, the area ratio is thus transparent to the X server. Any events
outside this area will send events equal to the maximum value of that axis.
The area always starts at the device's origin in it's current rotation, i.e.
it takes left-handed-ness into account.
.TP
This feature is provided by this driver, not by libinput.

.SH BUGS
This driver does not work with \fBOption \*qDevice\*q\fR set to an event
node in \fI/dev/input/by-id\fR and \fI/dev/input/by-path\fR. This can be
usually be worked by using \fBSection \*qInputClass\*q\fR with an
appropriate \fBMatch*\fR statement in the __xconfigfile__(__filemansuffix__).

.SH AUTHORS
Peter Hutterer
.SH "SEE ALSO"
__xservername__(__appmansuffix__), __xconfigfile__(__filemansuffix__), Xserver(__appmansuffix__), X(__miscmansuffix__)
